spec: subtype checking only for reference types (#311)
dfinity/candid: spec/Candid.md

This subtyping is implemented during the deserialisation of Candid at an expected type. As described in [Section Deserialisation](#deserialisation), the binary value is conceptually first _decoded_ into the actual type and a value of that type, and then that value is _coerced_ into the expected type.

This section describes the coercion, as a relation `V : T ~> V' : T'` to describe when a value `V` of type `T` can be coerced to a value `V'` of type `T'`. The fields `V`, `T` and `T'` can be understood as inputs and `V'` as the output of this relation.
To describe these values, we re-use the syntax of the textual representation.

#### Primitive Types

On primitve types, coercion is the identity:
```
<t> ∈ <numtype>, bool, text, null
---------------------------------
<v> : <t> ~> <v> : <t>
```

Values of type `nat` coerce at type `int`:
```
--------------------------
<nat> : nat ~> <nat> : int
```

Coercion into `reserved` is the constant map (this is arbitrarily using `null` as “the” value of `reserved`):
```
--------------------------
_ : <t> ~> null : reserved
```

> NB: No rule is needed for type `empty`, because there are no values of that type. By construction, `<v> : <t> ~> _ : empty` will not hold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NB: No rule is needed for type `empty`, because there are no values of that type. By construction, `_ : empty ~> _ : _` will not hold.
```

#### Vectors

Vectors coerce pointwise:
```
<v> : <t> ~> <v'> : <t'>
----------------------------------------------------
vec { <v>;* } : vec <t> ~> vec { <v'>;* } : vec <t'>
```

#### Options

The null value coerces into any option type:
```
-----------------------------
null : _ ~> null : opt <t>

> ```

Reviewer: This would allow `null : reserved ~> null : opt <t>`. I guess that’s ok, we want that to hold, although previously we had a dedicated rule for `reserved`.

It might still be easier to go through the input types separately (`null`, `opt t`, `reserved`, other `t`) with their own rules.

An optional value coerces at an option type, if the constituent value has a suitable type, and else goes to `null`:
```
<v> : <t> ~> <v'> : <t'>
----------------------------------------
opt <v> : opt <t> ~> opt <v'> : opt <t'>

not (<v> : <t> ~> _ : <t'>)
----------------------------------------
opt <v> : opt <t> ~> null : opt <t'>
```

> Coercing a non-null, non-optional and non-reserved type at an option type treats it as an optional value, if it has a suitable type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Coercing a non-null, non-optional and non-reserved type at an option type treats it as an optional value, if it can be decoded successfully:
```
(It’s no longer just the type that matters.)

```
not (null <: <t'>)
<v> : <t> ~> <v'> : <t'>
--------------------------------
<v> : <t> ~> opt <v'> : opt <t'>
```

Any other value goes to `null`:
```

not (null <: <t'>)
not (<v> : <t> ~> _ : <t'>)
--------------------------------
<v> : <t> ~> null : opt <t'>

null <: <t'>
not (null <: <t>)
----------------------------
<v> : <t> ~> null : opt <t'>

> ```

Reviewer: Do we need a rule for `reserved`? I guess that depends on whether the type `reserved` has more than just the value `null`, and that is a philosophical debate that we better avoid here (in the wire format it has only one value, but in a semantic model maybe not). So to avoid the discussion, maybe explicitly say that
```
 <v> : reserved ~> null : opt <t'>
```

This subtyping is implemented during the deserialisation of Candid at an expected type. As described in [Section Deserialisation](#deserialisation), the binary value is conceptually first _decoded_ into the actual type and a value of that type, and then that value is _coerced_ into the expected type.

This section describes the coercion, as a relation `V : T ~> V' : T'` to describe when a value `V` of type `T` can be coerced to a value `V'` of type `T'`. The fields `V`, `T` and `T'` can be understood as inputs and `V'` as the output of this relation.
To describe these values, we re-use the syntax of the textual representation.

#### Primitive Types

> On primitve types, coercion is the identity:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On primitive types, coercion is the identity:
```

This subtyping is implemented during the deserialisation of Candid at an expected type. As described in [Section Deserialisation](#deserialisation), the binary value is conceptually first _decoded_ into the actual type and a value of that type, and then that value is _coerced_ into the expected type.

> To model this, we define a partial coercion function `C[t1 ~> t2] : t1 -> t2`. This function maps values of type `t1` to values of type `t2`. For every `t1, t2` with `t1 <: t2`, the function is always defined, but not every `t1, t2` has a coercion.

Reviewer: I don’t think I would model it that way, but more like we had before (before 6e62bbf277ffbe32dfadb20e7e80814c0772dba6), with the universal set of values `V` as the input, and the only change being that in `V`, references values have type annotations.

But I can’t quite put my finger on _why_ that’s better, so maybe carry on if this doesn’t match your gut feeling.

Reviewer: Also `t1 ~> t2` isn’t really a meaningful relation. There is just a partial function `C` with inputs `v : t1` and `t2`. So maybe
```
C(v : t1, t2) : t2
```
would work.

Author: I think they are equivalent, but you are right that inference rules are more natural here.

To describe these values, we re-use the syntax of the textual representation, and use the the `<annval>` syntax (i.e. `(v : t)`) if necessary to resolve overloading.

#### Primitive Types

On primitve types, coercion is the identity:
```
C[<t> ~> <t>](x) = x     for every <t> ∈ <numtype>, bool, text, null
```

Values of type `nat` coerce at type `int`:
```
C[nat ~> int](<nat>) = <nat>
```

Coercion into `reserved` is the constant map (this is arbitrarily using `null` as “the” value of `reserved`):
```
C[<t> ~> reserved](_) = null
```
NB: No rule is needed for type `empty`, because there are no values of that type. By construction, `C[empty ~> <t>]` is the unique function on the empty domain.

#### Vectors

Vectors coerce pointwise:
```
C[vec <t> ~> vec <t'>]( vec { <v>;* } ) = vec { C[<t> ~> <t'>](<v>);* }
```

#### Options

The null type and the reserved type coerce into any option type:
```
C[null ~> opt <t>](null) = null
```

An optional value coerces at an option type, if the constituent value has a suitable type, and else goes to `null`:
```
C[opt <t> ~> opt <t'>](null) = null

> C[opt <t> ~> opt <t'>](opt <v>) = opt C[t ~> t'](v)  if t ~> t'
> C[opt <t> ~> opt <t'>](opt <v>) = null               if not (t ~> t')

Reviewer: This doesn't quite work; we really need to check if `C[t ~> t'](v)` (note the `v` matters!) is defined. So maybe
```suggestion
C[opt <t> ~> opt <t'>](opt <v>) = v'   if C[t ~> t'](v) = v'
C[opt <t> ~> opt <t'>](opt <v>) = null if C[t ~> t'](v) is not defined.
```

```

Coercing a non-null, non-optional and non-reserved type at an option type treats it as an optional value, if it has a suitable type:
```

> C[<t> ~> opt <t'>](<v>) = opt C[<t> ~> <t'>](v)  if not (null <: <t'>) and <t> ~> <t'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
C[<t> ~> opt <t'>](<v>) = v' if not (null <: <t'>) and opt C[<t> ~> <t'>](v) = v'
```

```

> Any other type goes to `null`:

Reviewer: We are now analysing values, not types
```suggestion
Any other value goes to `null`:
```

```

> C[reserved ~> opt <t>](_) = null
> C[<t> ~> opt <t'>](_) = null  if not (null <: <t'>) and not (<t> ~> <t'>)
> C[<t> ~> opt <t'>](_) = null  if null <: <t'> and not (null ~> <t>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
C[reserved ~> opt <t>](_) = null
C[<t> ~> opt <t'>](v) = null  if not (null <: <t'>) and C[<t> ~> <t'>](v) is undefined
C[<t> ~> opt <t'>](_) = null  if null <: <t'> and and not (null <: <t>)
```
(I think we need the last line as as, but I’m not sure, have to think more about it. Note that `null <: <t>` is just fancy pants for “an opt-like type”, and does not require a subtype check, just a peek at `<t>`).

The null value coerces into any option type:
```
null <: <t>
-----------------------------

> null : <t> ~> null : opt <t'>

Author: I think it's fine. We use `null <: <t>` to represent `null`, `reserved`, `opt _` in many places.

> null : <t> ~> null : opt <t'>

Reviewer: That's `null <: <t>`, the type, not `null : <t>`, the value.

The rule as written by you would accept ill-typed input like `null : int`. It's clear that this is not what we mean, but it doesn't hurt to be precise.

> null : <t> ~> null : opt <t'>

Author: The premise is `null <: <t>`, so `<t>` can only be `null`, `reserved` or `opt _`. It cannot be `int`.

> null : <t> ~> null : opt <t'>

Reviewer: Ah, I didn't notice that. Sorry, my bad. This works of course.

 * the `<nat3>*` field names are those only in the expected type, which therefore must be of optional or reserved type. The `null` value is used for these.

```
<v1> : <t1> ~> <v1'> : <t1'>
opt empty <: <t3>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
record { <nat1> = <v1>;* <nat2> = <v2>;* } : record { <nat1> : <t1>;* <nat2> : <t2>;* } ~>
record { <nat1> = <v1'>;* <nat3> = null;* } : record { <nat1> : <t1'>;* <nat3> : <t3>;* }
```

#### Variants

Only a variant value with an expected tag coerces at variant type.

```
<v> : <t> ~> <v'> : <t'>
----------------------------------------------------------
variant { <nat> = <v>; } : variant { <nat> : <t>; _;* } ~>
variant { <nat> = <v'> } : variant { <nat> : <t'>; _;* }
```

#### References

> For function and services reference values, the coercion relation checks whether the given types are actually subtypes of the expected type, and fails else:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For function and services reference values, the coercion relation checks whether the given types are actually subtypes of the expected type, and fails otherwise:
```

> Function and services reference values are untyped, so the coercion function is the identity here:

Reviewer: No longer true!
```suggestion
For function and services reference values, the coercion relation checks whether the given types are actually subtypes of the expected type, and fails else:
```

* Roundtripping:
  ```
  (<v> : <t>) ⟺ C[<t> ~> <t>](<v>) = <v>
  ```

> * Soundness of subtyping (or, alternatively, well-definedness of coercion)

Reviewer: This needs to be now split into two properties:

* Well-typedness:
  ```
  ∀ <v> : <t>. C[<t> <: <t'>](<v>) : <t'> (if defined)
  ```
* Totality (on subtypes):
  ```
  <t> <: <t'> ⇒ ∀ <v> : <t> C[<t> <: <t'>](<v>) is defined
  ```

* Roundtripping:
  ```
  (<v> : <t>) ⟺ <v> : <t> ~> <v> : <t>
  ```

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion

* Well-typedness
  ```
  <v> : <t> ~> <v'> : <t'> ⇒ <v'> <: <t'>
  ```

````

It remains to be seen if such theorems need `<v> : <t>` as an assumption. A technicality, but still. Maybe we should state explicit that the relation is only defined on well-typed input. Or maybe it holds by construction.

  ```
  does not imply
  ```

>   C[<t1> ~> <t3>] = C[<t2> ~> <t3>] ⚬ C[<t1> ~> <t2>]

Author: How to formulate this part?

Reviewer: We can actually drop the assumption about subtyping, and state

NB: Transitive coherence does not hold:
```
<v1> : <t1> ~> <v2> : <t2>,  <v2> : <t2> ~> <v3> : <t3>, 
```
and
```
<v1> : <t1> ~> <v3'> : <t3> 
```
do not imply `<v3> = <v3'>`.

However, it implies `<v3> ~ <v3'>` is the smallest homomorphic, reflexive, symmetric relation that satisfies `∀ v. opt v ~ null`.
